---
title: DocPad Architecture - Basics
tags: ['metadata', 'architecture', 'extension']
layout: post
author: Lukasz Gornicki
day: February 21, 2015
description: Understanding the DocPad project structure and its architecture
---

I've just learned that I should not write in the post, what will be present in the next one. Before I show you how I've created this blog post from the front end side (responsiveness, style, github pages deployment) I have to explain to you some basics, like the structure of the project and overall architecture/mechanisms of DocPad.

## Structure

### root

This is what you have on the `root`:

- `blog-docpad-learn`
 - `node_modules`: This directory gets created once you run `npm install` in the project. As I already mentioned, DocPad is a Node.js app, therefore it needs all the node dependencies in the project.
 - `out`: Once you start the project for the first time, the whole rendered content goes to this single directory. Once you generate your content properly, content of this folder is what you want to host on your server.
 - `src`: Will get back to this one.
 - `docpad.coffee`: DocPad's brain. This is a configuration file for your project. It's content is created with CoffeeScript, but if you really, I mean really have something against and want to use JavaScript, then just name the file `docpad.js`.
 - `package.json`: Each Node.js project has its config file with all the information about the project and its dependencies. All the docpad plugins that we are using, are registered in this file. This is why it is so simple to install the project with simple `npm install`. It just picks up your dependencies and downloads them to your project.
 - `README.md`: Your repo needs documentation. Get use to it; each git repository has a readme file that should contain its description and quick steps to run it.

### src

This is what you have in the `src` directory:

- `src`
 - `documents`: Whatever you put here, DocPad takes it in during build and process them accordingly.
 - `files`: This is a place for all the static files, that are required for your project, but do not require any action from DocPad.
 - `layouts`: Here you define all the layouts for your project. In case of this blog, these are a HTML layouts with predefined markup structure for the whole project and for a specific post.

It is possible to change this naming to have more intuitive names: render for documents and static for files. You can do it by adding proper configuration to `docpad.coffee` file. For more details [click here](https://docpad.org/docs/config).

### out vs documents and files

As you already know, `out` directory is a place for your generated static content. How files go there?

1. DocPad looks on the `documents` directory first and triggers generation process.
  * From the documents metadata information it knows which layout (located in `layouts` directory) should be used to render a content
  * From the document extension it knows how to process the content, should it be a conversion from markdown to html or something else?
  * And yeah, there are much more things happening at this point, but they are not relevant now
2. Whatever gets out from `documents` is combined together with `files` directory in the `out` directory. It means that if you had some files in `files/scripts` and `documents/scripts` directories, content of both is added to `out/scripts`

## Generation

I don't want to explain everything here as that would be to much for start. Let me just focus now on basic introduction to documents metadata and extension importance.

### Document's Metadata

For DocPad, every file stored in `documents` folder is an object that you can parse to JSON format. It not only contains the content of the file but also a bunch of very useful information, matadata that can help you when you need to query for a specific file and render it wherever you want.

There are 2 types of metadata:
* The one added with DocPad by default
* The one added by you to a specific file in the [yaml](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML) format

Let me show you a sample basing on this post:
* DocPad metadata: [download](downloads/metadata_sample.txt) as it is quite a lot of data I don't want to put on the page
* My post metadata:
```
title: DocPad Architecture - Basics
tags: ['metadata', 'architecture', 'extension']
layout: post
author: Lukasz Gornicki
day: February 20, 2015
description: Understanding the DocPad project structure and its architecture
```
You can quickly spot that these metadata are not only useful while querying but also if you need to display something on the page. Notice where are they used on my blog.

### Document's Extension

Currently in my project you can notice two different ways of using files extensions:
* `html.md`: This way DocPad knows that a file contains markdown content that must be rendered to HTML
* `html.eco`: This way DocPad knows that a file contains some Eco templating that must be processed before we get a final HTML. More about templating in next blogs.

You can define processing per file, there is not global setting that you are dependent on. You can even do this `html.md.eco`, so process some templating, then markdown and have it all in the HTML markup. How cool is that?

Read also [Plugins](#plugins) section where I explain how is it possible to have Markdown and Eco processing.

## Layouts

First of all, whatever you have in the `layout` directory doesn't go to the `out` directory. Layouts just make your life easier by wrapping your content in some html markup that you just want to write once and do not write it again, over and over. This blog project has two layouts, for now:
* **default**: It contains the main html markup for the whole blog. Reference to styles and scripts, and the html header that is the same for all pages.
* **post**: It uses **default** layout and adds some additional markup that should be used when you want to render html for each post.

Let me try to explain it by telling you how this post got rendered into the `2015-02-21.html` file. This post has the following metadata: `layout: post`. It means that during project generation, DocPad puts the content of this post inside the `post` layout that adds the picture with post introduction. Because `post`  layout depends on `default` layout, DocPad will take the content of the post and the `post` layout inside the `default` layout and thanks to it final `2015-02-21.html` file will contain all the references to styles and scripts....and will look nice, as it looks now.

## Plugins

The beauty of DocPad architecture is that it is super modular. DocPad core contains only the basic mechanisms and general definitions. Looking on what you've currently learned from this post, DocPad core knows that it needs to process everything that is in the `documents` folder, it also knows that he needs to pay attention to files extensions and metadata, both, default and custom.

Modular means, that you can plug in any functionality you want, and you can easily plug it out whenever you want. Like in case of this blog project, to have a scalable blog with posts written in markdown I had to install additional plugins:
* [docpad-plugin-marked](https://github.com/docpad/docpad-plugin-marked): To have some engine to parse markdown to html. If you are new to markdown, you should go [here](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) for more details. In general with markdown, it is super easy to write for web. Instead of using pure html to bold the text like this `<strong>bolded text</strong>` you can just write \*\*bolded text\*\*. Just take a look on the source of this post to see how it was written with markdown: [click here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/derberg/blog-docpad-learn/master/src/documents/posts/2015-02-21.html.md).
* [docpad-plugin-eco](https://github.com/docpad/docpad-plugin-eco): To nicely use CoffeeScript inside html files to have scalable project. What does that mean? Scalable means that you can add whatever you want as many times as you want, and your scalable solution will always serve it. Looking on this blog, take a look on the [main page](/index.html) and the list of all available posts. I don't add them there manually, my simple Eco template code does it:
```
<% for post in @getCollection("posts").findAll().toJSON(): %>
  <div class="post-preview">
      <a href="<%- post.url %>">
          <h2 class="post-title">
              <%- post.title %>
          </h2>
          <h3 class="post-subtitle">
              <%- post.description %>
          </h3>
      </a>
      <p class="post-meta">Posted by <a href="#"><%- post.author %></a> on <%- post.day %></p>
  </div>
  <hr>
<% end %>
```
It may look complicated at the beginning. I just want to visualize that thanks to these few lines of code my main page is scalable and one I will have 20 posts in my blog, they will be listed there automatically. In next posts you will teach you this and the `@getCollection` part.
* [docpad-plugin-ghpages](https://github.com/docpad/docpad-plugin-ghpages): I installed this plugin cause the whole blog is hosted on GitHub using **GitHub Pages** offering and with this plugin it is super easy and fast to publish content from my machine.
