---
title: Get Some Data! part 1
tags: ['usability', 'tracking', 'data', 'statistics', 'environment']
layout: post
author: Lukasz Gornicki
day: May 12, 2015
description: "Learn from your reader's behavior and power up with DocPad's environments configuration"
---

## Some Teenage Talking

My last blog post was last month. Many things were happening around. I got approved as a speaker for a conference about the Evolution of Technical Communication: http://etc-conference.eu/agenda2015 . I will basically talk about how at [hybris](https://yaas.io) we managed to totally change approach to how we document and how we are able to do it with DocPad.
Also my wife needed my help. She is learning English and now she's focused mostly on a vocabulary from her study books. So I wanted to create for her a super simple and nice responsive web app for that purpose: http://derberg.github.io/voca/ . I still need to add some 3rd party integrations there, but the basic MVP is there. Now she just needs to fill in the data :)

## Data!!!

How do you know if your documentation page is usable? It depends if your audience is an anonymous guy on the other side of the ocean, or a dude sitting next to your desk. If you are lucky and able to talk to your audience directly, that is the best way to gather feedback on how your user experience implementation works in practice. Unfortunately we all know that luck is not something you get in your life all the time :)

So how to get some data if you do not know who is reading your documentation portal? You have a totally anonoymous audience you cannot contact directly. There is a technology waiting at your service. You need to use some tracking application that could:
* Provide you with statistics that will tell you where is your audience located, what browsers it uses, if they prefer desktop or mobile
* Get a time they've spent on your portal
* Understand their flow on your portal, where do they go when they access the main page? what path they had to choose to get to the page that they were interested with the most?

Some software offers additional features like for example heat maps. In short, when you read the page you usually move the mouse to the point that you currently look at, so that software tracks it. Then you get a nice screen shot with a page and points (most heated areas) that brought readers attention. This gives you some kind of idea on where you should for example place the most important information that you want your reader to notice.

Enough writing, practice now. Because with DocPad we develop pure web page where we can add anything we want, we will also add scripts that collect needed data and sent to the software we want to use.

I don't have a solid opinion and enough experience that would allow me to say: "Google Analytics is obviously the best tracking tool ever". So I will use 2 different tools and after some time just evaluate which statistics brings the biggest value and are presented in a digestive way.

The software I've selected is:
* [Google Analytics](http://www.google.com/analytics/)
* [Inspectlet](http://www.inspectlet.com/)

## Create Accounts and Obtain Tracking Scripts

I don't want to explain how to create an account for each service I mentioned above. I also do not want to explain how to navigate there and obtain scripts that you need to include in your DocPad project - it is all about doing it on your own, clicking through and then thanks to below samples you will get an idea about what you need to look for. I hope that is clear.

## Adding Scripts

Because I do not want to track myself while working on the blog locally, I will:

* Define a custom environment that I will use from now on to generate my blog
* Configure all the tracking scripts inside the DocPad configuration file.

### Configure Environment

There are many use cases I could provide now to explain when you could use environments. I could start writing about minification of java scripts and css, custom plugins usage and many others, but that is not a place and time for it. For now I will use the custom environment only for the tracking codes. Why? Because you want to track your users and not yourself. If you would embed the tracking code directly in your HTML markup, data would be sent to your tools also while started on a localhost, when you develop or just check how your blog looks like before deployment.

So to keep it short, environments are there to define how specific parts of your functionality behave when you generate a blog for deployment or when you run it locally with `docpad run` or `docpad server`.

#### Define Attributes

This is what you need to add to the config file

```
# custom configuration for specific environments
environments:
  production:
    templateData:
      tracking:
        google: ''
        inspectlet: ''
```

For now I leave the `tracking` attribute empty. I also need to add it to the main configuration `templateData` area where it will always stay empty.

```
# tracking codes that for local development should not be included
tracking:
  google: ''
  inspectlet: ''
```

So the name of the specific environment is `production`. To trigger a generation of the DocPad project with a specific environment you need to call the specific environment with the following command `docpad generate --env production`

#### Define Helpers

Now I need to create a simple functions (so called helpers) that will return a proper tracking code added to attributes I've defined in previous section.

```
#helpers for tracking codes
getTrackGoogle: ->
  @tracking.google

getTrackInspectlet: ->
  @tracking.inspectlet
```

They are added under `templateData` for main configuration and also for `production` specific environment.

#### Use Helpers in Your HTML Markup

So helpers help to retrieve values of your configuration. You add it to your HTML markup with [ECO](https://github.com/sstephenson/eco) templates. I wrote more about templating and `templateData` in [this post](2015-04-03.html).

Because I want to track user behavior on any page on my blog, this is obvious I have to include my tracking codes to the main layout, at the bottom of the `head` element.

```
  ...
  <%- @getTrackGoogle() %>
  <%- @getTrackInspectlet() %>
</head>
```

## Final Configuration File

So after you get your account, after you add a proper configuration and include the tracking codes in it, this is how your super basic configuration file should look like:

```
# DocPad Configuration File
# http://docpad.org/docs/config

# Define the DocPad Configuration
docpadConfig = {
  # =================================
  # Templates

  # set of variables and custom helper methods accessible through templates
  templateData:

    # tracking codes that for local development should not be included
    tracking:
      google: ''
      inspectlet: ''

    #helpers for tracking codes
    getTrackGoogle: ->
      @tracking.google

    getTrackInspectlet: ->
      @tracking.inspectlet

  # all docpad plugins custom config
  plugins:
    #plugin for github pages deployment
    ghpages:
      deployRemote: 'target'
      deployBranch: 'master'
      environment: 'production'


  # custom configuration for specific environments
  environments:
    production:
      templateData:
        tracking:
          google: "<script>(function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m)
            {i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
            (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();
            a=s.createElement(o),m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;
            a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)})(window,document,'script',
            '//www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');
            ga('create', 'UA-62858836-1', 'auto');
            ga('send', 'pageview');</script>"

          inspectlet: "<script type='text/javascript' id='inspectletjs'>
            window.__insp = window.__insp || [];
            __insp.push(['wid', 1668565138]);
            (function() {
            function __ldinsp(){var insp = document.createElement('script');
            insp.type = 'text/javascript'; insp.async = true;
            insp.id = 'inspsync';
            insp.src = ('https:'
            == document.location.protocol ? 'https' : 'http')
            + '://cdn.inspectlet.com/inspectlet.js';
            var x = document.getElementsByTagName('script')[0];
            x.parentNode.insertBefore(insp, x); }
            if (window.attachEvent) window.attachEvent('onload', __ldinsp);
            else window.addEventListener('load', __ldinsp, false);
            })();
            </script>"

        #helpers for tracking codes
        getTrackGoogle: ->
          @tracking.google

        getTrackInspectlet: ->
          @tracking.inspectlet

}

# Export the DocPad Configuration
module.exports = docpadConfig

```


Now let me wait few weeks and see if there is any movement on my page or maybe I should rethink the idea of this blog :)
