---
title: Modern Documentation with DocPad
tags: ['docpad']
layout: post
author: Lukasz Gornicki
date: January 30, 2015
description: Introduction to DocPad, the tool you should start using
---

Until April last year I was convinced that there are only two technologies you can use produce professional documentation portals:

* Wiki based solutions
* DITA

Of course I've seen some other tools to generate HTML output for documentation but I always thought about them as of some kind of Frankensteins. All these "automated Web UI documentation generators" or HTML outputs with crappy navigation tree.

So my working experience is connected only with wiki. It was Atlassian's Confluence - to be more precise. And I'm so happy I can write "was". I loved the tool with all its disadvantages, but since they introduced WYSIWYG editor everything changed. It is still an awesome tool for collaboration between different teams. It is not a good documentation tool.

What about DITA? I have no experience here, and this time I'm happy I can write "no". I saw few sample documentation source files with all these html/xml tags - yayks. I know there are tools that give you an editor for such files, but that is not my story, I don't want to have an editor with bunch of toolbars. Anyway, I don't want to focus on hating DITA here, as I'm pretty sure that there is a bunch of people in the world that love DITA. Guys, I'm your friend.

I just want to show you that there is something else. Something super cool and modern that you can start using. Something that doesn't not require an expensive consultancy and implementations. Something that you can do on your own - if not now, then for sure after reading my blog posts :)
If you read my about section, you know that my biggest focus goes to content structure, navigation, availability and flexibility. The tool that I want to intoruce you to gives a 100% flexibility in that field. With this tool the only limitation comes with a lack of imagination, which sometimes may be frustraiting...

# Static Site Generators

Yeah, right. Maybe Dynamic Seat Controllers? huh? I've learned about them (SSG not DSC), by accident, last year. I was conducting some research on how to document RESTfull WebService API and found this nice project: carte. It is a project build on Jekyll...and till that day I knew Jekyll only because of doctor Hyde (btw, interesting fact: there is also a static site generator called Hyde). So I've quickly tried it out and felt in love with it, and markdown too.

If there is Jekyll, the must be something else right? after some research, my friend - Google pointed me to this page Static Site Generator. You know what was my first thought? "I've just learned about Jekyll, and it's first release was already 6 years ago. Was I locked in a cave or something?".

So what we did was:

* Sorted the list of generators by popularity (Jekyll is an outstanding lider there)
* Picked 4 different tools built on different technologies
* Tried to port the Jekyll carte project to these tools
* Compared with Jekyll a tool that was the easiest to learn

I don't remember all the tools we checked. I just remember that I was checking nanoc and DocPad. Even though we didn't choose nanoc, it showed us how professional portals we can build with these tools - back in the time GitHub Developers portal was build with nanoc.

# DocPad

We decided to go with DocPad for several reasons, but one of the most important was that we were able to learn the basics and port carte project do DocPad in just two days. So what is DocPad. In fact it is not a static site generator :) Of course one of the things you can do with DocPad is to generate a static Web page, but it is just one thing.

DocPad was created and is maintained by awesome Australian company called Bevery. It is written in CoffeeScript, and it is a Nodejs application. Not sure how that sounds for you but for me it always sounds super hipster :)
Anyway, I'm an ex technical writer, so I will just do the usual bullet point description here:

* Its architecture is highly modular and prepared for unlimited contribution form the community. It means DocPad has only the core mechanism and the rest of the functionality is provided in plugins.
* Currently on NPM (it is a Node package manager that makes your life supper easy if you want to add new node modules to your project) you can find a list of 300 packages registered as a _docpad-plugin-_
* Plugins are written in CoffeeScript. CoffeeScript is a nicer non-developer readable version of JavaScript. It is not a new JavaScript cause at the end the CoffeeScript code must be compiled into JavaScript. It just makes it easier to understand the scripts and quickly learn to write your own
* It uses a great QueryEngine that



- inventing new approach for writing documentation in YaaS
- taking over a role of PO for DevPortal team
- working as a PO, architect, developer and still sharing my knowledge and experience in technical writing
- not only inventing new way of writing docu, but also authored initial guidelines on how to document services
- being responsible also for the devportal front end, being close with UI and UX team to get designs, but also refuse them if they do not fit the docu vision - so not blindly accept any designs
- promoting hybris by promoting our solution on a conference and internal lunch talk
- being totally honest with management, and sharing my frustrations about team setup from the very beginning. Which means giving management time to fix stuff and not to get informed about issues when it is to late
- I love that hybris allows me to work on super innovative project

- get more and more javascript/nodejs knowledge
- attend more conferences as a presenter (have 2 dev and 2 tw in mind)
- contribute to open source with docpad plugins that do not exist and we need to create them for our project
